README.md, before:

# Yield Curve Relative Value Trading Strategy

A sophisticated systematic trading strategy focused on exploiting relative value opportunities in the yield curve through spread trading, utilizing machine learning models and ensuring DV01-neutral positions.

## Project Structure

```
├── data/
│   ├── raw/         # Original FRED data
│   ├── processed/   # Cleaned and processed data
│   └── external/    # Additional data sources
├── src/
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── data_ingestion.py      # FRED API integration
│   ├── feature_engineering.py # Feature generation
│   ├── feature_analysis.py    # Feature analysis and selection
│   ├── model_training.py      # Model training framework
│   ├── backtest.py           # Backtesting system
│   ├── portfolio.py          # Portfolio management
│   ├── signal_generator.py   # Trading signal generation
│   ├── utils.py             # Utility functions
│   └── visualize_backtest.py # Performance visualization
├── models/                   # Saved model files
├── results/                  # Analysis results and logs
├── config.yaml              # Configuration settings
├── requirements.txt         # Project dependencies
├── CHANGES.md              # Change log
└── PROGRESS.md             # Project progress tracking
```

## Core Components

### 1. Data Processing Pipeline
- **Data Ingestion** (`data_ingestion.py`)
  - FRED API integration for treasury yields
  - Macro indicators data collection
  - Automated data cleaning and alignment
  - Missing value handling

- **Feature Engineering** (`feature_engineering.py`)
  - Calendar features (day of week, holidays)
  - Trend features (momentum, RSI, moving averages)
  - Yield curve features (PCA decomposition)
  - Carry and roll-down features
  - Macro indicators integration

- **Feature Analysis** (`feature_analysis.py`)
  - Feature importance analysis
  - Correlation analysis
  - Distribution analysis
  - Feature-target relationships

### 2. Model Training Framework (`model_training.py`)
- **Supported Models**
  - Traditional ML:
    - Random Forest
    - XGBoost
    - Ridge Regression
    - Lasso Regression
  - Deep Learning:
    - LSTM with configurable architecture
    - Feed-Forward MLP
  - Statistical:
    - ARIMA with automatic parameter selection

- **Training Features**
  - Walk-forward validation
  - Hyperparameter tuning
  - GPU support
  - Model persistence
  - Comprehensive logging
  - Early stopping
  - Cross-validation

### 3. Trading System
- **Signal Generation** (`signal_generator.py`)
  - Model prediction processing
  - Signal thresholding
  - Position sizing logic

- **Portfolio Management** (`portfolio.py`)
  - Position tracking
  - Risk management
  - Performance monitoring

- **Backtesting** (`backtest.py`)
  - Historical performance analysis
  - Transaction cost modeling
  - Risk metrics calculation

- **Visualization** (`visualize_backtest.py`)
  - Performance charts
  - Risk metrics visualization
  - Trade analysis plots

## Technical Implementation

### Feature Engineering
```python
# Example from feature_engineering.py
def _compute_trend_features(self, col: str) -> pd.DataFrame:
    features = pd.DataFrame(index=series.index)
    for lookback in LOOKBACK_PERIODS:
        # Level change
        features[f'{col}_change_{lookback}d'] = series - series.shift(lookback)
        # Percentage change
        features[f'{col}_pct_change_{lookback}d'] = series.pct_change(lookback)
        # Moving average
        features[f'{col}_ma_{lookback}d'] = series.rolling(lookback).mean()
        # Volatility
        features[f'{col}_vol_{lookback}d'] = series.rolling(lookback).std()
```

### Model Training
```python
# Example from model_training.py
class ModelTrainer:
    def __init__(self, spread: str, prediction_type: str, model_type: str):
        self.spread = spread
        self.prediction_type = prediction_type
        self.model_type = model_type
        self.hyperparameters = self.set_default_hyperparameters()

    def train(self):
        if self.model_type == 'lstm':
            return self.train_lstm()
        elif self.model_type == 'mlp':
            return self.train_mlp()
        elif self.model_type == 'arima':
            return self.train_arima()
```

## Setup and Installation

1. Clone the repository:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/yield-curve-trading.git
cd yield-curve-trading
```

2. Create and activate virtual environment:
```bash
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate
```

3. Install dependencies:
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

4. Configure settings:
- Copy `config.yaml.example` to `config.yaml`
- Update configuration parameters
- Set up FRED API key in environment variables

## Usage

1. Data Processing:
```bash
# Data ingestion
python src/data_ingestion.py

# Feature engineering
python src/feature_engineering.py

# Feature analysis
python src/feature_analysis.py
```

2. Model Training:
```python
from src.model_training import ModelTrainer

# Initialize trainer
trainer = ModelTrainer(
    spread='2s10s',
    prediction_type='next_day',
    model_type='mlp'
)

# Train model
results = trainer.train()
```

3. Backtesting:
```python
from src.backtest import Backtest

backtest = Backtest(
    model_path='models/model.pkl',
    start_date='2020-01-01',
    end_date='2021-12-31'
)

results = backtest.run()
```

## Project Rules

### 1. Documentation Updates
- Update PROGRESS.md for all changes, findings, fixes, and bugs
- Update CHANGES.md for all changes (forward-only, no deletions)
- Include timestamps and summaries in all updates

### 2. Commit Messages
Format: "Type(component): description"
- Feat(component): add new component
- Fix(component): fix api error
- Docs(readme): update readme
- Refactor(utils): refactor utils
- Style(tailwind): add new tailwind class
- Test(unit): add unit test
- Chore(deps): update dependencies

### 3. Coding Standards
- Python 3.8+ and PEP 8 style guidelines
- Meaningful variable and function names
- Comprehensive docstrings
- Modular code structure
- Proper error handling
- Reproducibility with random seeds

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Feat(component): add amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.

## Acknowledgments

- FRED API for data access
- Contributors and maintainers
- Open source community

Commit message:

Docs(readme): add backtest performance section with visualizations

README.md, after:

# Yield Curve Relative Value Trading Strategy

A sophisticated systematic trading strategy focused on exploiting relative value opportunities in the yield curve through spread trading, utilizing machine learning models and ensuring DV01-neutral positions.

## Backtest Performance (2010–2019)

This strategy demonstrates robust performance across multiple market regimes from 2010 to 2019.
It systematically captures relative value opportunities in the yield curve (e.g., steepeners vs. flatteners) while maintaining DV01-neutral exposure.

### Monthly Returns
![Monthly Returns](results/backtest/archive/monthly_returns.png)

### Trade Analysis
![Trade Analysis](results/backtest/archive/trade_analysis.png)

## Project Structure

```
├── data/
│   ├── raw/         # Original FRED data
│   ├── processed/   # Cleaned and processed data
│   └── external/    # Additional data sources
├── src/
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── data_ingestion.py      # FRED API integration
│   ├── feature_engineering.py # Feature generation
│   ├── feature_analysis.py    # Feature analysis and selection
│   ├── model_training.py      # Model training framework
│   ├── backtest.py           # Backtesting system
│   ├── portfolio.py          # Portfolio management
│   ├── signal_generator.py   # Trading signal generation
│   ├── utils.py             # Utility functions
│   └── visualize_backtest.py # Performance visualization
├── models/                   # Saved model files
├── results/                  # Analysis results and logs
├── config.yaml              # Configuration settings
├── requirements.txt         # Project dependencies
├── CHANGES.md              # Change log
└── PROGRESS.md             # Project progress tracking
```

## Core Components

### 1. Data Processing Pipeline
- **Data Ingestion** (`data_ingestion.py`)
  - FRED API integration for treasury yields
  - Macro indicators data collection
  - Automated data cleaning and alignment
  - Missing value handling

- **Feature Engineering** (`feature_engineering.py`)
  - Calendar features (day of week, holidays)
  - Trend features (momentum, RSI, moving averages)
  - Yield curve features (PCA decomposition)
  - Carry and roll-down features
  - Macro indicators integration

- **Feature Analysis** (`feature_analysis.py`)
  - Feature importance analysis
  - Correlation analysis
  - Distribution analysis
  - Feature-target relationships

### 2. Model Training Framework (`model_training.py`)
- **Supported Models**
  - Traditional ML:
    - Random Forest
    - XGBoost
    - Ridge Regression
    - Lasso Regression
  - Deep Learning:
    - LSTM with configurable architecture
    - Feed-Forward MLP
  - Statistical:
    - ARIMA with automatic parameter selection

- **Training Features**
  - Walk-forward validation
  - Hyperparameter tuning
  - GPU support
  - Model persistence
  - Comprehensive logging
  - Early stopping
  - Cross-validation

### 3. Trading System
- **Signal Generation** (`signal_generator.py`)
  - Model prediction processing
  - Signal thresholding
  - Position sizing logic

- **Portfolio Management** (`portfolio.py`)
  - Position tracking
  - Risk management
  - Performance monitoring

- **Backtesting** (`backtest.py`)
  - Historical performance analysis
  - Transaction cost modeling
  - Risk metrics calculation

- **Visualization** (`visualize_backtest.py`)
  - Performance charts
  - Risk metrics visualization
  - Trade analysis plots

## Technical Implementation

### Feature Engineering
```python
# Example from feature_engineering.py
def _compute_trend_features(self, col: str) -> pd.DataFrame:
    features = pd.DataFrame(index=series.index)
    for lookback in LOOKBACK_PERIODS:
        # Level change
        features[f'{col}_change_{lookback}d'] = series - series.shift(lookback)
        # Percentage change
        features[f'{col}_pct_change_{lookback}d'] = series.pct_change(lookback)
        # Moving average
        features[f'{col}_ma_{lookback}d'] = series.rolling(lookback).mean()
        # Volatility
        features[f'{col}_vol_{lookback}d'] = series.rolling(lookback).std()
```

### Model Training
```python
# Example from model_training.py
class ModelTrainer:
    def __init__(self, spread: str, prediction_type: str, model_type: str):
        self.spread = spread
        self.prediction_type = prediction_type
        self.model_type = model_type
        self.hyperparameters = self.set_default_hyperparameters()

    def train(self):
        if self.model_type == 'lstm':
            return self.train_lstm()
        elif self.model_type == 'mlp':
            return self.train_mlp()
        elif self.model_type == 'arima':
            return self.train_arima()
```

## Setup and Installation

1. Clone the repository:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/yield-curve-trading.git
cd yield-curve-trading
```

2. Create and activate virtual environment:
```bash
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate
```

3. Install dependencies:
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

4. Configure settings:
- Copy `config.yaml.example` to `config.yaml`
- Update configuration parameters
- Set up FRED API key in environment variables

## Usage

1. Data Processing:
```bash
# Data ingestion
python src/data_ingestion.py

# Feature engineering
python src/feature_engineering.py

# Feature analysis
python src/feature_analysis.py
```

2. Model Training:
```python
from src.model_training import ModelTrainer

# Initialize trainer
trainer = ModelTrainer(
    spread='2s10s',
    prediction_type='next_day',
    model_type='mlp'
)

# Train model
results = trainer.train()
```

3. Backtesting:
```python
from src.backtest import Backtest

backtest = Backtest(
    model_path='models/model.pkl',
    start_date='2020-01-01',
    end_date='2021-12-31'
)

results = backtest.run()
```

## Project Rules

### 1. Documentation Updates
- Update PROGRESS.md for all changes, findings, fixes, and bugs
- Update CHANGES.md for all changes (forward-only, no deletions)
- Include timestamps and summaries in all updates

### 2. Commit Messages
Format: "Type(component): description"
- Feat(component): add new component
- Fix(component): fix api error
- Docs(readme): update readme
- Refactor(utils): refactor utils
- Style(tailwind): add new tailwind class
- Test(unit): add unit test
- Chore(deps): update dependencies

### 3. Coding Standards
- Python 3.8+ and PEP 8 style guidelines
- Meaningful variable and function names
- Comprehensive docstrings
- Modular code structure
- Proper error handling
- Reproducibility with random seeds

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Feat(component): add amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.

## Acknowledgments

- FRED API for data access
- Contributors and maintainers
- Open source community
